# waffles

Generate DEMs from elevation data.

## Synopsis

```
waffles [OPTIONS] DATALIST
```

## Description

`waffles` is a data gridding tool for DEM generation using various gridding modules (Table 1). We leverage existing open-source software packages from a variety of sources including GMT, GDAL, and MB-System. From these sources, there are also multiple gridding algorithms, e.g., `spline, inverse distance weighting (IDW), triangulate, average, near-neighbor, etc.`

DEMs are generated by a combination of data masking, weighting, and interpolation.

See [dlim](/docs/dlim.md) for supported data-types.

A datalist is a file that contains a number of datalist entries, while an entry is a space-delineated line: `path [format weight uncertainty [name source date type resolution hdatum vdatum url]]`

### Uncertainty Grid Generation

In addition to DEMs `waffles` generates uncertainty grids that represent an estimate of potential interpolation errors based on a split-sample approach and distance to the nearest measurement. Using a split-sample approach, a percentage of the data is omitted, an interpolation method is applied, and the differences between the interpolated elevations and the original omitted elevations are calculated. We omit a percentage of the measurements, apply an interpolation method, and calculate the differences between the interpolated values and the omitted elevations. This process is repeated and the differences aggregated between the original measurements and the interpolated elevations and then we derive a best-fit equation of interpolation uncertainty as a function of distance to the nearest measurement.

### Spatial Metadata

In additon to DEMs and Uncertainty grids, `waffles` generates spatial metadata for DEMs that document the data sources that went into the DEM generation process.

### Options

`-R, --region`
Specifies the desired REGION;
Where a REGION is xmin/xmax/ymin/ymax[/zmin/zmax[/wmin/wmax]]
Use '-' to indicate no bounding range; e.g. -R -/-/-/-/-10/10/1/-
OR an OGR-compatible vector file with regional polygons. 
Where the REGION is /path/to/vector[:zmin/zmax[/wmin/wmax]].
If a vector file is supplied, will use each region found therein.

`-E, --increment`
Gridding INCREMENT and RESAMPLE-INCREMENT in native units.
Where INCREMENT is x-inc[/y-inc][:sample-x-inc/sample-y-inc]

`-M, --module`
Desired Waffles MODULE and options. (see available Modules below)
Where MODULE is module[:mod_opt=mod_val[:mod_opt1=mod_val1[:...]]]

`-S, --sample_alg`
ReSAMPLE algorithm to use (from gdalwarp)
Set as 'auto' to use 'average' when down-sampling and 'bilinear' when up-sampling
This switch controls resampling of input raster datasets as well as resampling
the final DEM if RESAMPLE-INCREMENT is set in -E

`-X, --extend`
Number of cells with which to EXTEND the output DEM REGION and a 
percentage to extend the processing REGION.
Where EXTEND is dem-extend(cell-count)[:processing-extend(percentage)]
e.g. -X6:10 to extend the DEM REGION by 6 cells and the processing region by 10
percent of the input REGION.

`-T, --filter`
FILTER the output DEM using one or multiple filters. 
Where FILTER is fltr_name[:opts] (see `grits --modules` for more information)
The -T switch may be set multiple times to perform multiple filters.
Append `:stacks=True` to the filter to perform the filter on the data stack instead 
of the final DEM.
Available FILTERS: blur, grdfilter, outliers, flats

`-L, --limits`
LIMIT the output elevation or interpolation values, append 
'u<value>' to set the upper elevation limit, 
'l<value>' to set the lower elevation limit,
'n<value>' to set the count per cell limit.
'p<value>' to set an interpolation limit by proximity, or 
's<value>' to set an interpolation limit by size, or
'c<value>' to set an interpolation limit by nodata-size percentile.
e.g. -Lu0 to set all values above 0 to zero, or 
-Ls100 to limit interpolation to nodata zones smaller than 100 pixels, or
-Ln2 to limit stacked cells to those with at least 2 contributing data records.

`-C, --clip`
CLIP the output to the clip polygon -C<clip_ply.shp:invert=False>

`-K, --chunk`
Generate the DEM in CHUNKs.

`-F, --format`
Output grid FORMAT. [GTiff]

`-O, --output-name`
BASENAME for all outputs.

`-P, --t_srs`
Projection of REGION and output DEM.

`-N, --nodata`
The NODATA value of output DEM.

`-A, --stack-mode`
Set the STACK MODE to 'mean', 'min', 'max' or 'supercede' (higher weighted data supercedes lower weighted data).

`-G, --wg-config`
A waffles config JSON file. If supplied, will overwrite all other options.
Generate a waffles_config JSON file using the --config flag.

`-H, --threads`
Set the number of THREADS (1). Each input region will be run in up to THREADS threads.

`-D, --cache-dir`
CACHE Directory for storing temp data.
Default Cache Directory is ~/.cudem_cache; cache will be cleared after a waffles session.
to retain the data, use the --keep-cache flag.

`-CO, --creation-options`
GDAL CREATION OPTIONS to use in raster creation.

`-f, --transform`
Transform all data to PROJECTION value set with --t_srs/-P where applicable.

`-p, --prefix`
Set BASENAME (-O) to PREFIX (append <RES>_nYYxYY_wXXxXX_<YEAR>v<VERSION> info to output BASENAME).
note: Set Resolution, Year and Version by setting this to 'res=X:year=XXXX:version=X', 
leave blank for default of <INCREMENT>, <CURRENT_YEAR> and <1>, respectively.

`-r, --grid-node`
Use grid-node registration, default is pixel-node.

`-w, --want-weight`
Use weights provided in the datalist to weight overlapping data.

`-u, --want-uncertainty`
Generate/Use uncertainty either calculated or provided in the datalist.

`-m, --want-mask`
Mask the processed datalist.

`-a, --archive`
ARCHIVE the datalist to the given region.

`-k, --keep-cache`
KEEP the cache data intact after run

`-x, --keep-auxiliary`
KEEP the auxiliary rastesr intact after run (mask, uncertainty, weights, count).

`-s, --spatial-metadata`
Generate SPATIAL-METADATA.

`-t, --flatten-result`
Flatten any remaining nodata values.

`-c, --continue`
Don't clobber existing files.

`-q, --quiet`
Lower verbosity to a quiet.

`--help`
Print the usage text

`--config`
Save the waffles config JSON and major datalist

`--modules`
Display the module descriptions and usage

`--version`
Print the version information


**Table 1.** Gridding modules available in the CUDEM software tool
"waffles."

|  ***Name***          |                ***Description*** |
|----------------------|----------------------------------|
|  gdal-average        |                Generate an average DEM using GDAL\'s *gdal_grid* command. |
|  coastline           |                Generate a coastline (land/sea mask) using a variety of data sources. |
|  cudem               |                CUDEM integrated DEM generation. Generate an topographic-bathymetric integrated DEM using a variety of data sources. |
|  IDW                 |                Generate a DEM using an Inverse Distance Weighted algorithm. If weights are used, will generate a UIDW DEM, using weight values as inverse uncertainty, as described [here](https://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/concern/graduate_projects/79407x932), and [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3104781/inverse-distance-weighted-idw-interpolation-with-python) |
|  gdal-invdst         |                Generate an inverse distance DEM using GDAL\'s *gdal_grid* command. |
|  gdal-linear         |                Generate a linear DEM using GDAL\'s *gdal_grid* command. |
|  mbgrid              |                Generate a DEM using MB-System\'s *mbgrid* command. |
|  gdal-nearest        |                Generate a nearest DEM using GDAL\'s *gdal_grid* command. |
|  gmt-nearneighbor    |                Generate a DEM using GMT\'s *nearneighbor* command |
|  num                 |                Generate an uninterpolated DEM using various gridding modes, including options from GMT's *xyz2grd* command. |
|  linear               |               Generate a DEM using Scipy's linear gridding algorithm) |
|  cubic               |                Generate a DEM using Scipy's cubic gridding algorithm |
|  nearest              |               Generate a DEM using Scipy's nearest gridding algorithm |
|  stacks              |                Generate a DEM using a raster stacking method. By default, calculate the \[weighted\]-mean where overlapping cells occur. Set supercede to True to overwrite overlapping cells with higher weighted data. | 
|  gmt-surface         |               Generate a DEM using GMT\'s *surface* command | 
|  gmt-triangulate     |               Generate a DEM using GMT\'s *triangulate* command | 
|  vdatum              |                Generate a vertical datum conversion grid. |
|  flatten              |               Generate a DEM by flattening nodata areas. |
|  lakes              |               Estimate/interpolate Lake bathymetry. |
|  uncertainty         |               Estimate interpolation uncertainty. |

## Python API

## Example